---
title: Version 4.0.0
author: Trygve Lie
authorURL: https://github.com/trygve-lie/
---

We are very happy to release version 4.0.0 of Podium. Both `@podium/layout` and
`@podium/podlet` are now available at v4.0.0.

Version 4.0.0 attempts to be almost entirely backwards compatible with version 3.0.0.

This release contains the following changes:

### JSON Schema

The manifest which defines the contract between layouts and podlets are now
defined using [JSON Schema](https://github.com/podium-lib/schemas/blob/master/lib/manifest.schema.json). The main reason for this is to cater for Podium implementations
in languages other than Node.js.

### Document template

This version introduces a concept we call a document template.
A document template is intended to supply the necessary HTML for the page outside of the markup you need write to display your page content.

While a v4 ships with a default document template it's straight forward to build your own custom template and plug this into both layouts and podlets
which helps make it easier to develop podlets in isolation (from layouts) while imposing the same constraints on it that it will have when included in a layout.

Please see the [document template](/docs/next/api/document) section for further
information.

### HTTP framework free

Originally Podium was bound to Express.js but with this release Podium is 100%
HTTP framework free. It is even possible write Podium servers using only the core Node.js HTTP
server module.

Having said this, Express.js is still first class in Podium which means it is still possible to use Podium in
an Express.js server without anything more than the core Podium layout and podlet modules.

Besides supporting Express.js, Hapi and Fastify are supported through plugins maintained by
the Podium team.

Serverless / cloud functions will also be supported in a future release.

### Multiple assets support

It was previously only possible to set a single reference to JavaScript and CSS client side assets using a podlet's
`.js()` and `.css()`.

With version 4, it is now possible to call these methods multiple times to set multiple assets.

An additional `type` field has also been added to the `.js()` method making it possible to signal to layout servers
what type of JavaScript file are being specified.

### Layout assets

The `@podium/layout` module now has `.js()` and `.css()` methods which work the
same way as in `@podium/podlet`. The intent is to be able to set client side assets
which are related specifically to the layout.

### HttpIncoming replaces context argument

During the process of rewriting to HTTP framework free, an `HttpIncoming` object was introduced which
is passed between the various parts of Podium.

You can read more about [`HttpIncoming` and its role here](/docs/next/api/incoming).

Due to this, you should pass an instance of `HttpIncoming` (available at `res.locals.podium` in express) to the `.client.fetch()` and `.client.stream()` methods in
a `@podium/layout` instead of the context.

Previously Podium expected you to pass a Podium context to the fetch method like so:

```js
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const ctx = res.locals.podium.context;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(ctx);
    ...
});
```

This will still work until Podium version 5 but it is expected that developers instead call fetch as follows:

```js
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(incoming);
    ...
});
```

The context is part of `HttpIncoming`.

### The fetch method now resolves with a response object

When a Layout retrieves the content from a podlet it will now resolve with a
response object instead of just the content as a string.

Previously calling `.client.fetch()` would resolve with the content of a podlet as
a string:

```js
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(incoming);
    console.log(content);  // <div> .... </div>
});
```

Now the fetch method with resolve with and object containing the podlet's content, css, js and
headers:

```js
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(incoming);
    console.log(content);  // {js: [], css: [], headers: {}, content: '<div> .... </div>'}
});
```

For backwards compabillity, using the response in a template literal or in string
concatenation will result in the content value in the string. This will still work until
Podium version 5.

```js
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(incoming);
    console.log(`${content}`);  // <div> .... </div>
});
```

The `.client.stream()` works as before, but there is now a `beforeStream` event
which emits a response object:

```js
app.get('/', (req, res, next) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;

    const stream = component.stream(incoming);
    stream.once('beforeStream', data => {
        console.log(data); // {js: [], css: [], headers: {}, content: null}
    });

    stream.pipe(res);
});
```

### State events

The `.client` in `@podium/layout` now has an extended `state` event and `.state`
property can be used to determine what state a layout is in.

```js
layout.client.on('state', state => {
    console.log(state);
});

const podlet = layout.client.register({
    uri: 'http://foo.site.com/manifest.json',
    name: 'foo',
});

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    const incoming = res.locals.podium;
    const content = await podlet.fetch(incoming);
    ...
});
```

The state provides information about the "podlet update life cycle". This is
useful for determining when a podlet is being updated and when an update is
complete or if a podlet is in an unhealty state.

### Improved documentation

In the process of making Podium HTTP framework free and supporting multiple
HTTP framework our documentation site has received some polish.

This site will now hold all documentation for end users of Podium and eventually it will
have code examples reflecting all HTTP frameworks which are officially supported.

From now on, the documentation found in the README's in each module is to be
considered documentation for developing Podium and not end user documentation.
